## What is Observability?
- The ability to understand and measure the state of a system based upon data generated by the system.
- Allows you to generate actionable outputs from unexpected scenarios in dynamic environments.
- There’s a greater need for observability as we move towards distributed systems & microservices based application.
- When it comes to troubleshooting issues, we need more information than just what is wrong, we need to know why our application entered a specific state, what component is responsible and how we can avoid it in the future, e.g, Why are error rates rising, Why is there high latency, Why are services timing out.
## 3 Pillars of Observability
1. `Logging`
   - Logs are records of events that have occurred and encapsulate information about the specific event.
   - Logs are comprised of: `Timestamp` of when the log occurred and `Message` containing information.
   - Logs are the most common form of observation produced by systems, However, they can be difficult to use due to the verbosity of the logs outputted by systems/applications.
2. `Metrics`
   - Provide information about the state of a system using numerical values, e.g, `CPU Load`, `Number of open files`, `HTTP response times`, `Number of errors`.
   - The data collected can be aggregated over time and graphed using visualization tools to identify `trends` over time.
   - Metrics contain 4 pieces of information: 
     1) `Metric name`
     2) `Value`: most recent or current value of the metric
     3) `Timestamp` for the metric
     4) `Dimensions`: additional information about the metric
     - Example:
```
|------ Metric name ------| |--------- Dimensions ----------| Value Timestamp
v                         v v                               v   v       v
node_filesystem_avail_bytes{fstype="vfat", mountpoint="/home"} 5000 4:30AM 12/1/22
```
3. `Traces`
   - Allow you to follow operations as they traverse through various systems & services, so we can follow an individual request and see it flow through our system hop by hop.
   - Each trace has a `trace-id` that can be used to identify a request as it traverses the system.
   - Individual events forming a trace are called `spans`, each span tracks the following: `Start time`, `Duration` and `Parent-id`.

***Prometheus is a monitoring solution that is responsible for collecting and aggregating `metrics`.***